    Title: Datalog for Static Analysis
    Date: 2017-02-15T01:22:04
    Tags: DRAFT, HOPL, by Ben Greenman

<!-- more -->

Datalog is an old DSL that frequently appears in work on static analysis.
This edition of HOPL 2017 explores the origins of Datalog in general, its
early use in program analysis, and why Datalog remains a useful tool.

Full notes:

- [https://github.com/nuprl/hopl-s2017/blob/master/datalog-for-static-analysis/datalog-for-static-analysis.pdf](https://github.com/nuprl/hopl-s2017/blob/master/datalog-for-static-analysis/datalog-for-static-analysis.pdf)

- - -

Datalog as a language was introduced by 1978 (its semantic foundations date
back to 1976). It is _predicate logic_ as a database query language. The
traditional view of a Datalog program is a _time invariant_ transformation
over the _time varying_ data stored in an external database.

In the early 1990's, Uwe Aβmann designed a graph rewriting systems (EARS) that
could:

1. Uniformly express various problems in static analysis
2. Systematically derive efficient solutions to such problems.

(Prior work had derived the same solutions with ad-hoc methods.) Aβmann's system
is equivalent to Datalog.

In 1993, Reps used the <tt>CORAL</tt> deductive database (an implementation of
Datalog) to derive an on-demand (read: lazy) implementation of program slicing
from a _specification_ of the slicing problem.

Both Aβmann's and Reps work appeared in 1994. This was the first time Datalog
had been used to implement a static analysis.

Researchers continue to use Datalog because:

- predicate logic (specifically: Horn clauses without function symbols or negation)
  is useful for expressing recursive relations ... and static analyses are all about recursive relations
- the language separates _specifications_ from their _implementation_
- there are many techniques for efficiently serving a Datalog query
- these techniques have been implemented in [at least one](https://developer.logicblox.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/logicblox-sigmod15.pdf)
  commercial Datalog engine

For an excellent description of how Datalog can benefit static analysis, see
the introduction to [Rep's paper](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.648.1834&rep=rep1&type=pdf).

