    Title: PRL at SNAPL'17
    Date: 2017-04-19T16:46:54
    Tags: by Gabriel Scherer

PRL recently produced three papers for the
[SNAPL](http://snapl.org/2017/index.html) conference.

- [Linking Types for Multi-Language Software: Have Your Cake and Eat
  It Too](https://dbp.io/pubs/2017/linking-types-snapl.pdf), by Daniel
  Patterson and Amal Ahmed.
- [Search for Program Structure](http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/gasche/research/canonical-forms/snapl.pdf),
  by Gabriel Scherer
- Migratory Typing: Ten Years Later, by Sam Tobin-Hochstadt, Matthias
  Felleisen, Robert Bruce Findler, Matthew Flatt, Ben Greenman, Andrew
  M. Kent, Vincent St-Amour, T. Stephen Strickland and Asumu Takikawa

<!-- more -->

### [Linking Types for Multi-Language Software: Have Your Cake and Eat
  It Too](https://dbp.io/pubs/2017/linking-types-snapl.pdf)

Daniel Patterson and Amal Ahmed, 2017

> When implementing large software systems, programmers should be able
> to implement each part of the system using the programming language
> best suited to the task at hand. But current multi-language systems
> are difficult for programmers to reason about because components
> interact only after compilation to a lower-level target. The
> source-level contexts that programmers use to reason about their
> components no longer match the reality of the contexts that their
> components are running in. The additional contexts impact the notion
> of equivalence that justifies behavior-preserving modifications of
> code, whether programmer refactorings or compiler optimizations.
>
> We advocate that language designers provide programmers with the
> means to reason about inputs from “other” languages, but in a way
> that remains close to the semantics of their language. Linking types
> are a well-specified minimal extension of the source language that
> allow programmers to optionally annotate where in their programs
> they can link with components that would not be expressible in their
> unadulterated source language, giving them fine-grained control over
> the contexts that they must reason about and the equivalences that
> arise.

### [Search for Program Structure](http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/gasche/research/canonical-forms/snapl.pdf)

Gabriel Scherer, 2017.

> The community of programming language research loves the
> Curry-Howard correspondence between proofs and
> programs. Cut-elimination as computation, theorems for free,
> 'call/cc' as excluded middle, dependently typed languages as proof
> assistants, etc.
>
> Yet we have, for all these years, missed an obvious observation:
> "the structure of *programs* corresponds to the structure of proof
> *search*". For pure programs and intuitionistic logic, more is known
> about the latter than the former. We think we know what programs
> are, but logicians know better!
>
> To motivate the study of proof search for program structure, we
> retrace recent research on applying the logical technique of focusing
> to study the canonical structure of simply-typed λ-terms. We then
> motivate the open problem of extending canonical forms to support
> richer type systems, such as polymorphism, by discussing a few
> enticing applications of more canonical program representations.

### Migratory Typing: Ten Years Later

Sam Tobin-Hochstadt, Matthias Felleisen, Robert Bruce Findler, Matthew
Flatt, Ben Greenman, Andrew M. Kent, Vincent St-Amour, T. Stephen
Strickland and Asumu Takikawa, 2017.

> In this day and age, many developers work on large, untyped code
> repositories. Even if they are the creators of the code, they notice
> that they have to figure out the equivalent of method signatures
> every time they work on old code. This step is time consuming and
> error prone.
>
> Ten years ago, the two lead authors outlined a linguistic solution
> to this problem. Specifically they proposed the creation of typed
> twins for untyped programming languages so that developers could
> migrate scripts from the untyped world to a typed one in an
> incremental manner. Their programmatic paper also spelled out three
> guiding design principles concerning the acceptance of grown idioms,
> the soundness of mixed-typed programs, and the units of migration.
>
> This paper revisits this idea of a migratory type system as
> implemented for Racket. It explains how the design principles have
> been used to produce the Typed Racket twin and presents an
> assessment of the project’s status, highlighting successes and
> failures.

.

SNAPL is not dissimilar to the (french-speaking)
[JFLA](http://jfla.inria.fr/) that I am more familiar with --- with an
added irritating call for paper and unreasonable registration
price. It has an interesting diversity of topics of presentation: see
also the complete [list of accepted
papers](http://snapl.org/2017/papers.html) this year, and the [list of
the previous edition](http://snapl.org/2015/papers.html).
