    Title: PRL Offsite 2019 Retrospective
    Date: 2019-11-17T23:09:01
    Tags: offsite, by Ben Greenman, by Olek Gierczak

On November 11th 2019, the PRL had a private offsite meeting at the
 [More Than Words bookstore][mtw] in downtown Boston.
For future offsite organizers, this post records what happened and how.

<!-- more -->

## Early Planning, Goals

Every Fall, the PRL holds a kickoff meeting to assign
 [roles](http://prl.ccs.neu.edu/contact) for the coming academic year.
This year, Prof. Amal Ahmed led the meeting and expressed interest in having
 a retreat at some point.
Seconds later, Amal enlisted Olek Gierczak and Ben Greenman
 to help plan a retreat.

> Ben G. was on the (unsuccessful) 2018 retreat planning committee.
> The three lessons from that year were: (1) Veterans Day is a possible date
> in the Fall, (2) there are approximately zero possible dates in the Spring
> and Summer, (3) the [Warren Conference Center][warren]
> is [Northeastern University's only franchised](https://www.northeastern.edu/events/northeastern-owned-off-campus-venues)
> off-campus venue.

The **motivation** for the retreat was to bring our growing department together
 for one day in the hope that everyone has (at least) a small interaction with
 everyone else.
These little interactions are crucial for new Ph.D. students --- both to get
 to know the group, and to become known.
They're also useful for everyone else to build a stronger community and
 to open doors for collaboration.
And yet, despite the fact that these interactions are an admittedly key benefit
 of having a lab, the last time the PRL got all together in a big way (more
 than a few hours for PL seminar or Ph.D. open house) was for the
 [Spring 2017 edition](http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/matthias/7480-s17/index.html)
 of HOPL.

Our primary **goal** this year was for every Ph.D student to present research.
Time permitting, we wanted a keynote speaker, a panel discussion, and activities.
Weather permitting, we wanted to go outside during lunch.

In light of the main goal, we prefer to call the event an "offsite"
 (or "offsite meeting") rather than a "retreat" because we wanted an
 informative day rather than a relaxing one.


## Booking, Logistics

Our planning went like this: (1) pick date, (2) find venue, (3) invite keynote
 speaker, (4) order food, and (5) arrange technical program.
The process took 2 months because that's all we had.

### Date

In the beginning, we chose Veterans' Day (2019-11-11) and Northeastern [reading
 day](https://registrar.northeastern.edu/app/uploads/2019-2020-University-Wide-Calendar-List.pdf)
 (2019-12-05) as possible dates.
We ended up with Veterans' Day.
<!-- TODO dear Olek / Amal, do you remember why we ruled out readings day? Bad for Warren Center? Bad for some people? -->

A small number of lab members were opposed to Veterans' Day
They gave two reasons: the Fall semester is especially busy, and Veterans' Day
 is a federal holiday.


### Venue

The first venue we tried was the [Warren Conference Center][warren] in
 Framingham.
We submitted an online form; no response.
We searched the website for contact email addresses; no luck.
We called the office, got forwarded to the event manager, and left a message; no response.
Lastly we asked the [Khoury Events Team](https://www.khoury.northeastern.edu/people/chelsea-smith/)
 to reach out on our behalf.
They returned with an email address and
 [event menu](/blog/static/warren-center-meetings-and-retreats.pdf)
 (Thank you Chelsea and Donald!)
 and we decided the Warren Center was too expensive for our small/last-minute offsite.
<!-- Donald Pepple (Northeastern) made contact with Christine Barisano (Framingham) -->

Second, we contacted the [Northeastern University Alumni Center](https://alumni.northeastern.edu/about/alumni-center/).
They were not open on Veterans' Day 2019.

Third, we turned to Google and Yelp for venue options in New England.
Most were at a corporate-level price range, but this search led to our
 winner: the [More Than Words][mtw] bookstore in the South End.

More Than Words (MTW) is a bookstore and event space.
We got in touch via email, visited the store, and then booked.

> More Than Words is also a nonprofit social enterprise that offers job training
> for ~350 young adults each year. If you visit, you'll see a mix of "employees"
> and "volunteers" helping out.

Booking was complicated, though, by the fact that Northeastern requires
 [liability insurance](http://catalog.northeastern.edu/graduate/health-sciences/academic-policies-procedures/liability-insurance/)
 for all off-campus events.
If **you** are booking an event, get a contract from the venue well ahead
 of time and allow 2 to 4 weeks for Northeastern to process and sign it.
We received our contract with 1 week until the payment was due and were very
 lucky that the Northeastern administrative staff met the deadline.

Here are more facts about MTW:

- the theater space seats 30 with lots of extra space
- the two long tables in the reading room can almost seat 30 people
- the projector is 16:9 native and accepts HDMI input (bring your own HDMI adaptor)
- there's no whiteboard, but MTW can supply an easel stand
- much of the furniture in store is antique and for sale, so be careful using
  it (both to avoid damaging it, and because antiques can be oddly-shaped)
- the bookstore was closed on Veterans' Day, but we were able to have our
  event and buy books during
- MTW may have fridge space to temporarily hold leftovers
- closest T station: [Tufts Medical Center](https://www.mbta.com/stops/place-tumnl)


### Keynote

Initially, we wanted two keynote speakers: one "from" industry
 and one from academia.
We also wanted speakers with universal appeal because this was a first offsite
 and because we had limited time to solicit feedback (universal = roughly
 equal research overlap with everyone).

In the end, we had zero keynote speakers.

Sent out a google form, seeded with arb / obvious / committee-biased picks,
 used responses to pick one, got interest but no committment and didn't
 work out the invite heard back from NSF too late to decide.


<!-- to future planners: we invited Kathi Fisler -->


### Food, Coffee, Tea



[retreat info]

venue, food, other?

## Else


- - -


Catering. We booked flour for lunch catering. Easy; online form. The form
didn't have options for Veteran's Day, but we sent an email and they got back
to us in 1-2 days. Cup of coffee, local coffee shop for breakfast/beverages,
took 4 days to respond. Overall we were happy with the quality of everything.
We mostly just found places by looking at google maps and checking nearby.
Nothing besides flour seemed to have an online form, and the few emails we sent
out was hit or miss for responses, so we recommend calling. Coffee: 3 gallons
of coffee in the morning, 1 gallon of tea. Too much coffee! 2 gallons of
coffee, 1 gallon of tea is good for ~25 people. Not enough blueberry muffins!
Muffins/croissants over bagels. Cup of coffee did not provide small plates!
They provided all else. Flour didn't give us enough forks, bring own utensils
just in case! We got too many sandwiches; we got 30 sandwiches (60 halves).
Meat went quickly, so did hummus and cauliflower grilled cheese. People didn't
seem to like the potato and goat cheese as much. Maybe there is a better
caterer for veggie/vegan friendly. We picked assorted sandwiches. In the
future, specify! 2 people wished there was desert (sticky buns!). More than
words asked us who the vendors were, we named names, and that was the end of
that.

Keynote invitation: Kathi Fisler. She ended up saying no due to some plans, but
said thanks for the invite, and mentioned interest in being a keynote for
future offsites. This was fortunate because our goal was for every PhD student
to talk, and this made it much easier to do that and have breaks. Even longer
breaks, especially in the afternoon, would be good!

We needed more time for breakfast/for people to show up! We started around
9:20/25, and ended it on time. Maybe shift things a bit. 

3 15 minute talks in a row, break, and at the end of the day a panel (which ran
late) and that was the whole day. 

The panel started with asking faculty for a mistake in their career.
Discussions ran long, and we didn't have a panel moderator that helped switch
between topics and discourage people from monologuing too long, and the panel
would have been more productive had we had that. 

Analyses:

Panel maybe could have been run differently? What goal are we trying to solve
with the panel, and are there other ways to have the same kind of discussion?

<!-- -->

[mtw]: https://mtwyouth.org
[warren]: http://www.warrencenter.com
